GRINS is an enhanced automation system for community radio stations, especially designed keeping the context of rural areas of developing countries in mind. The current version of GRINS allows radio station operators to schedule broadcasts, preview programs, make and receive phone calls, record live transmissions, and maintain an extensive semantically searchable library. In future releases, GRINS will be enhanced to handle the sending and receiving of SMS messages, and Internet connectivity to share and stream content with other GRINS deployments. Some of the key features of GRINS that distinguish it from other radio broadcast platforms are as follows:

**Single management console:** Radio stations have many moving parts, especially if rich features such as phone calls and conferencing have to be supported. GRINS simplifies the management and running of the radio station by providing a single console to archive conversations, schedule programs, receive phone calls, and search and manage content. This sets GRINS apart from any other commercial or open-source broadcast system available so far.

**Commodity hardware:** GRINS does most processing in software to eliminate the need of buying expensive audio hardware, and yet imposes very low processing overhead on the system. For this reason, GRINS can be run off commodity PCs and single board computers, significantly reducing the costs of setting up community radio stations.

**Service oriented design:** All functionality provided by GRINS is handled by different services, such as the Audio Service for playout, Archiver Service for recording, Library Service for storage, etc. Each of these services can be run either on a single machine, or off multiple machines. This makes the deployment of GRINS extremely flexible to be able to fit into any kind of a radio station setup.

**Application development platform:** The open API of GRINS allows third party developers to build their own radio applications using the various underlying services that GRINS provides. For example, you can build specific applications for the broadcast of educational programs or health programs, that allow quick search and playback features for the respective topics. In the future, once GRINS begins to support the video and Internet planes, these applications can even be multiplanar in nature.

**Easy to use UI:** The GRINS user interface has been especially designed keeping in mind the target population of rural areas in India and other developing countries. The use of large icons and simple navigation makes GRINS easy to use even for radio operators who are new to computerized systems.

**Diagnostics:** A key feature of GRINS, the system can actually detect any network faults or audio cable errors or poor audio quality through Digital Signal Processing (DSP), and guide the operators on how to fix the problem locally. This reduces the down-time of the system so that radio stations located in remote rural areas do not have to wait for a technician to visit them and fix small problems.

**Log shipping:** Even if the radio station does not have Internet connectivity, problems can still be reported back to us. All that is needed is a USB stick. The key is inserted into any of the various machines for GRINS. GRINS then copies its logs on to the key. Now, when the key is inserted into any Internet cafe or any other Internet enabled PC, scripts are automatically fired off to upload the logs to our server. We can then take a look at these logs and figure out any problems in your setup.